README.md, before:

# Dijkstra Algorithm for Godot



### What it does

Howdy !

This is a GDNative project for Godot game engine, that introduces Dijktra Map pathfinding node. It provides a much needed versatility currently absent from the build-in AStar pathfinding. Its main feature is the ability to populate the entire graph with shortest paths towards a given origin point. Total lenghs of shortest paths and directions can then be easily looked up for any point in the graph.

Common use cases include: pre-computing pathfinding for tower-defense games, RTS games and roguelikes; Listing available moves for turn-based games; aiding in movement-related AI behaviour. You can find more examples in [this amazing article](http://www.roguebasin.com/index.php?title=Dijkstra_Maps_Visualized).

The library is written in Rust programming language and performance should be comparable to C/C++ (aproximately 10-20x faster than GDScript).

Note that the API is now stable! Some features may be added over time.


### Installing

This repository contains pre-compiled binaries for Windows x64 and Linux x64. The project should just run after download on these platforms. The binaries may be slightly out-of-date, depending on branch in question. For other platforms you will have to compile the project yourself.

You will have to : 
* [install rust compiler](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) and you will most likely have to install the dependencies described in [GDNative bindings for rust github](https://github.com/GodotNativeTools/godot-rust).

* Once you do that, open a terminal, navigate to the directory containing Cargo.toml and run "cargo build --release" command.

It will compile the DLL binary file (or equivalent) and put it into "res://target/release/" directory (first time around, it may take several minutes, because it has to automatically download and compile all the dependencies). 

* Preferably, you should move the binary to /Dijkstra_map_library/ directory to keep all the binaries organized.

* Open Godot and add path to the binary file into the "Dijkstra_map_library/dijkstra_map_library.tres" GDNativeLibrary resource. This resource tells godot which binary to use for which system. For more info see the [GDNative C example in Godot's documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/plugins/gdnative/gdnative-c-example.html).

## Getting Started

After having followed *Installing* direction, open the godot project and open and run one of the demo scenes 
*  /Project Example/dragon_attack.tscn
*  /Project Example/Turn based.tscn
* /API demo/demo.tscn

toy around with it, the code of dragon_attack is heavily commented
mess with the exports variable in demo.tscn (click on the root node and tweak the values at the topof the inspector)

you can also look at the unit tests in Tests/unit/*

you should also look at our documentation in DOCUMENTATION.md file.

To use the Dijkstra Map in your own projects, you can copy the /Dijkstra_map_library/ directory to the root of your project (warning: putting it to subdirectories may crash godot, because paths in GDNativeLibrary resource are not relative).

## Features && HowTo's

#### Basic Behaviour

In godot project you create a new DijkstraMap Node.
* First you need to specify the graph by adding points (vetices) and connections between them (edges). Unlike build-in AStar, DijkstraMap does not keep positions of the points (it only ever refers to them by their ID) and the costs of the connections need to be explicitly specified. It is user's reponsibility to keep track of point's position.

you can do so manually with them `add_point` and `connect_points` methods 
or automatically with `add_*_grid` methods (`add_square_grid` or `add_hexagonal_grid` ...)

* once you've done that, you can enable or disable any points  you want from the pathfinding by passing its id to `enable_point` or `disable_point` (points are enabled by default).

* you then have to call `recalculate` method with appropriate arguments, by defaut, if you only have to pass an id or a PoolIntArray of id's, of the origin point(s). The method will calculate shortest paths from that origin point to every point in the graph.

* you can then access the information using various methods. Most notably `get_cost_map()` and `get_direction_map` which return a dictionary with keys being point's IDs and values being respective information about the length of the shortest path from that point or ID of the next point along the path.

* It is also possible to get a list of all points who's path's lenghs are withing given range, using the `get_all_points_with_cost_between()` method.

* You can get the full shortest path from a given point using `get_shortest_path_from_point` method. 

#### More recalculate flags

`recalculate` method has various optionional arguments that modify its behavior. It is possible to:

* switch intended direction of movement (useful when connections are not bidirectional).

* set maximum allowed cost for paths and/or termination points, both of which terminate the algorithm early (useful to save CPU cycles).

* set initial costs for the input points (useful to "weigh" the origin/destination points)

* set weights for different terrain types.

Please, see DOCUMENTATION.md for full explanation.

#### The usefulness of terrain

Points in the DijkstraMap have an optional terrain ID parameter. This feature makes it possible to re-use the same DijkstraMap node for units with different movement restrictions, without having to duplicate the entire DijkstraMap and manually modifying all connection costs.

For example, let's say you have 3 unit types in your game: Footsoldier (which moves the same speed regardless of terrain), Cavalry (which moves half the speed through forests) and Wagon (which can only move on roads). First you decide on integer IDs you will use for different terrain types, for example:
```
const TERRAIN_ID_OTHER=-1 #Note: default terrain ID -1 is hard-coded in the DijkstraMap
const TERRAIN_ID_ROAD=0
const TERRAIN_ID_FOREST=1
```
Now you assign these terrain IDs to the points in your DijkstraMap. This can be done while adding the points (`add_point` method has optional second parameter for terrain ID) or even after they were added (via `set_terrain_for_point` method). By default (if not specified otherwise), points get terrain ID of `-1`.

When recalculating the DijkstraMap for the Cavalry, we specify "terrain weights" optional argument as follows:
```
my_dijkstra_map.recalculate(origin_point, {"terrain weights": {TERRAIN_ID_FOREST:2.0} } )
```
Now, during this recalculation, connection costs of forest points are doubled* (ie. movement speed is halved) and the shortest paths will try avoid forest points, to minimize travel time. Specifically, path segments will only lead trough forests, if they are half the length of alternative paths. 

* *note: connection costs between two points are multiplied by the average of their respective weights. All terrain weights that remain unspecified in the argument have default terrain weight of `1.0`.

When recalculating the DijkstraMap for the Wagon, we specify "terrain weights" optional argument as follows:
```
my_dijkstra_map.recalculate(origin_point, {"terrain weights": {TERRAIN_ID_FOREST:INF, TERRAIN_ID_OTHER:INF} } )
```
Now, during this recalculation, all points, except roads, are completely inaccessible, because their connections have infinite cost. The calculated paths will only follow roads.

## Notes

Careful ! If you pass arguments of the wrong signature to the rust API, the game will not crash, if you're lucky and have a terminal open, it ight print an error there but not in godot! this issue can be avoided by using a gdscript wrapper
But it can lead to non trivial bugs, consider yourselves warned



A prettier wrapper in GDscript can be found at API demo/IDijkstra.gd
which is nice cause it offers autocompletion but a work in progress only



## Running the tests

If you're familiar with the gut API, you can launch the Gut.tscn and run some test

state of the test : currently few of them pass, its due to the person writing them (me) not having understood the API, but this will be fixed quickly


## Contributing

Open an issue before working on a feature, bugfix, unit tests, then we discuss it, then you can work on it (or let someone else) then do a pull request

Before doing that pull request, If you modified the rust code be sure you have build it "cargo build --release" and it still works! (the unit tests pass, dragon.tscn is running, the demo is running .

## TODO
find a way to compile it to all platforms in order to ship it via the godot asset store


## Acknowledgments

Commit message:

alerts users of the broken nature of master.

README.md, after:

# Dijkstra Algorithm for Godot



### What it does

Howdy !

The Master branch is broken while porting to gdnative 0.9.0, use the branch v1.0 for production!

This is a GDNative project for Godot game engine, that introduces Dijktra Map pathfinding node. It provides a much needed versatility currently absent from the build-in AStar pathfinding. Its main feature is the ability to populate the entire graph with shortest paths towards a given origin point. Total lenghs of shortest paths and directions can then be easily looked up for any point in the graph.

Common use cases include: pre-computing pathfinding for tower-defense games, RTS games and roguelikes; Listing available moves for turn-based games; aiding in movement-related AI behaviour. You can find more examples in [this amazing article](http://www.roguebasin.com/index.php?title=Dijkstra_Maps_Visualized).

The library is written in Rust programming language and performance should be comparable to C/C++ (aproximately 10-20x faster than GDScript).

Note that the API is now stable! Some features may be added over time.


### Installing

This repository contains pre-compiled binaries for Windows x64 and Linux x64. The project should just run after download on these platforms. The binaries may be slightly out-of-date, depending on branch in question. For other platforms you will have to compile the project yourself.

You will have to : 
* [install rust compiler](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install) and you will most likely have to install the dependencies described in [GDNative bindings for rust github](https://github.com/GodotNativeTools/godot-rust).

* Once you do that, open a terminal, navigate to the directory containing Cargo.toml and run "cargo build --release" command.

It will compile the DLL binary file (or equivalent) and put it into "res://target/release/" directory (first time around, it may take several minutes, because it has to automatically download and compile all the dependencies). 

* Preferably, you should move the binary to /Dijkstra_map_library/ directory to keep all the binaries organized.

* Open Godot and add path to the binary file into the "Dijkstra_map_library/dijkstra_map_library.tres" GDNativeLibrary resource. This resource tells godot which binary to use for which system. For more info see the [GDNative C example in Godot's documentation](https://docs.godotengine.org/en/stable/tutorials/plugins/gdnative/gdnative-c-example.html).

## Getting Started

After having followed *Installing* direction, open the godot project and open and run one of the demo scenes 
*  /Project Example/dragon_attack.tscn
*  /Project Example/Turn based.tscn
* /API demo/demo.tscn

toy around with it, the code of dragon_attack is heavily commented
mess with the exports variable in demo.tscn (click on the root node and tweak the values at the topof the inspector)

you can also look at the unit tests in Tests/unit/*

you should also look at our documentation in DOCUMENTATION.md file.

To use the Dijkstra Map in your own projects, you can copy the /Dijkstra_map_library/ directory to the root of your project (warning: putting it to subdirectories may crash godot, because paths in GDNativeLibrary resource are not relative).

## Features && HowTo's

#### Basic Behaviour

In godot project you create a new DijkstraMap Node.
* First you need to specify the graph by adding points (vetices) and connections between them (edges). Unlike build-in AStar, DijkstraMap does not keep positions of the points (it only ever refers to them by their ID) and the costs of the connections need to be explicitly specified. It is user's reponsibility to keep track of point's position.

you can do so manually with them `add_point` and `connect_points` methods 
or automatically with `add_*_grid` methods (`add_square_grid` or `add_hexagonal_grid` ...)

* once you've done that, you can enable or disable any points  you want from the pathfinding by passing its id to `enable_point` or `disable_point` (points are enabled by default).

* you then have to call `recalculate` method with appropriate arguments, by defaut, if you only have to pass an id or a PoolIntArray of id's, of the origin point(s). The method will calculate shortest paths from that origin point to every point in the graph.

* you can then access the information using various methods. Most notably `get_cost_map()` and `get_direction_map` which return a dictionary with keys being point's IDs and values being respective information about the length of the shortest path from that point or ID of the next point along the path.

* It is also possible to get a list of all points who's path's lenghs are withing given range, using the `get_all_points_with_cost_between()` method.

* You can get the full shortest path from a given point using `get_shortest_path_from_point` method. 

#### More recalculate flags

`recalculate` method has various optionional arguments that modify its behavior. It is possible to:

* switch intended direction of movement (useful when connections are not bidirectional).

* set maximum allowed cost for paths and/or termination points, both of which terminate the algorithm early (useful to save CPU cycles).

* set initial costs for the input points (useful to "weigh" the origin/destination points)

* set weights for different terrain types.

Please, see DOCUMENTATION.md for full explanation.

#### The usefulness of terrain

Points in the DijkstraMap have an optional terrain ID parameter. This feature makes it possible to re-use the same DijkstraMap node for units with different movement restrictions, without having to duplicate the entire DijkstraMap and manually modifying all connection costs.

For example, let's say you have 3 unit types in your game: Footsoldier (which moves the same speed regardless of terrain), Cavalry (which moves half the speed through forests) and Wagon (which can only move on roads). First you decide on integer IDs you will use for different terrain types, for example:
```
const TERRAIN_ID_OTHER=-1 #Note: default terrain ID -1 is hard-coded in the DijkstraMap
const TERRAIN_ID_ROAD=0
const TERRAIN_ID_FOREST=1
```
Now you assign these terrain IDs to the points in your DijkstraMap. This can be done while adding the points (`add_point` method has optional second parameter for terrain ID) or even after they were added (via `set_terrain_for_point` method). By default (if not specified otherwise), points get terrain ID of `-1`.

When recalculating the DijkstraMap for the Cavalry, we specify "terrain weights" optional argument as follows:
```
my_dijkstra_map.recalculate(origin_point, {"terrain weights": {TERRAIN_ID_FOREST:2.0} } )
```
Now, during this recalculation, connection costs of forest points are doubled* (ie. movement speed is halved) and the shortest paths will try avoid forest points, to minimize travel time. Specifically, path segments will only lead trough forests, if they are half the length of alternative paths. 

* *note: connection costs between two points are multiplied by the average of their respective weights. All terrain weights that remain unspecified in the argument have default terrain weight of `1.0`.

When recalculating the DijkstraMap for the Wagon, we specify "terrain weights" optional argument as follows:
```
my_dijkstra_map.recalculate(origin_point, {"terrain weights": {TERRAIN_ID_FOREST:INF, TERRAIN_ID_OTHER:INF} } )
```
Now, during this recalculation, all points, except roads, are completely inaccessible, because their connections have infinite cost. The calculated paths will only follow roads.

## Notes

Careful ! If you pass arguments of the wrong signature to the rust API, the game will not crash, if you're lucky and have a terminal open, it ight print an error there but not in godot! this issue can be avoided by using a gdscript wrapper
But it can lead to non trivial bugs, consider yourselves warned



A prettier wrapper in GDscript can be found at API demo/IDijkstra.gd
which is nice cause it offers autocompletion but a work in progress only



## Running the tests

If you're familiar with the gut API, you can launch the Gut.tscn and run some test

state of the test : currently few of them pass, its due to the person writing them (me) not having understood the API, but this will be fixed quickly


## Contributing

Open an issue before working on a feature, bugfix, unit tests, then we discuss it, then you can work on it (or let someone else) then do a pull request

Before doing that pull request, If you modified the rust code be sure you have build it "cargo build --release" and it still works! (the unit tests pass, dragon.tscn is running, the demo is running .

## TODO
find a way to compile it to all platforms in order to ship it via the godot asset store


## Acknowledgments
